PDF version of this document [here](syllabus_week1.pdf)

**Economics of Land Governance**

**Week 1**  
**Land property rights, economic structure and political economy**

January 8-12, 2018

**INSTRUCTOR:**

**Jonathan Conning**  Hunter College and The Graduate Center, City University of New York. Email: <jconning@hunter.cuny.edu>

Office hours: TBD

**ONLINE CLASS MATERIALS:**
[github.com/jhconning/land_uct_2018](https://github.com/jhconning/land_uct_2018)

Please refer to the github site for latest list of topics, slides, jupyter notebooks, lab materials, etc.

**SCHEDULE OF CLASSES:** Topics and required readings to be covered in each
class or lab are described below. Class slides and supporting jupyter notebooks
with additional content and code will be made available ahead of class via the
class [github repository](https://github.com/jhconning/land_uct_2018) These
often refer in depth to studies that we will not have time to read in detail but
that are listed in the end bibliography.

**DAY 1: Land tenure and governance: origins, change, diversity and performance**

**Topics:** Introduction to the week’s topics including a brief sketch of the
diversity of land tenure and governance regimes across time and space and a
short list of topics where ineffective land rights institutions or concentrated
land ownership could affect the efficiency and equity of land-related resource
allocations and matter for the direction of structural transformation in the
economy. We then examine theories of the origins and evolution of property
rights and contracts starting with the ideas of Ronald Coase, Esther Boserup and
others. Some 'Coasean bargaining' theories suggest that land property rights and
tenure evolve to overcome externalities and economize on ‘transactions costs’ to
adapt to new challenges and opportunities that arise in response to rising
population and changing technologies and opportunities for trade. While local
norms and institutions can provide the self-enforcing spontaneous order required to organize activity in many situations, authors like Douglas North argue that a powerful and yet impartial and constrained state is needed to provide effective institutions to delineate rights and adjudicate disputes in order to sustain impersonal trade over larger distances and networks. Today we read and discuss theories and divergent historical trajectories on the origin and evolution of property rights. Do property rights evolve toward ever more efficient forms as argued by some or are coordination failures other ‘transactions’ allow
maladapted institutions to persist? Is the direction of institutional change and
the establishment of new forms of property rights directed by the search to
reduce ‘transactions costs’ or by the interests and appropriative activities of
elites? We lay out simple benchmark models with and without missing markets to
study how technology, relative factor endowments and the existing structure of
property rights and contracts might shape equilibrium resource allocation or
misallocation, and the rewards to institutional innovation.

*Required Reading:*

North, Douglass. 1990. “An Introduction..,” chapter 1 in *Institutions,
Institutional Change, and Economic Performance*. Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press. [[link](http://assets.cambridge.org/97805213/94161/excerpt/9780521394161_excerpt.pdf)]

Otsuka, K and F. M. Place, 2001. “Issues and Theoretical Framework,” chapter 1
in *Land tenure and natural resource management: A comparative study of agrarian communities in Asia and Africa*. IFPRI & Johns Hopkins University Press. (*read
only pages 3-19*) [[link](http://ebrary.ifpri.org/cdm/ref/collection/p15738coll2/id/126296)]

Binswanger, H.P., K. Deininger, and G. Feder. 1995. “Power, Distortions, Revolt
and Reform in Agricultural Land Relations,” in *Handbook of Development
Economics, Vol 3*. 2659–2772. North Holland: Elsevier. (*read only pages
2659-2682*) [[link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1hcQZcYAp3qp_xv5ObrLNuGm_sbqGxigp/view?usp=sharing)]

Lecture slides, [jupyter notebooks](https://github.com/jhconning/land_uct_2018/tree/master/notebooks) on ‘Coase and the “Coase Theorem”’

Day 1 Lab: [Problem Set 1](notebooks/Lab1Week1.pdf)

**DAY 2. Resource Allocation Benchmarks, the markets for land, labor and other factors**

*Topics:* We extend our benchmark models to study equilibrium farm responses in
subsistence and market contexts and characterize planner and market problems
with households that are differentiated in their initial ownership of traded
land and labor and non-traded farming skill. We study how resource allocation
and shadow factor prices adjust in response to changes technology, land
abundance, or market access, and the property rights and costly contracting
adaptations that might be needed to adapt to such changing circumstances, as
well as the conditions for these to arise. Land rent and land tax issues are
also discussed. We then study a calibrated application of farm land use in
Malawi that claims to measure resource mis-allocation which the authors
attribute to failures of land rental markets. We examine recent empirical
evidence on the role of emergent land markets in Africa. We can extend this
class of models to study how insecure land rights might affect migration
incentives and therefore also resource allocation *across* sectors. We look at
evidence from recent natural experiments. Finally, we read an empirical paper
that cautions against attributing most of measured misallocation from cross
sectional studies to land market imperfections, as it is likely confounded with
household and plot-specific unobserved heterogeneity that can be controlled for
with better data and methods.

Lecture slides, [jupyter notebooks](https://github.com/jhconning/land_uct_2018/tree/master/notebooks) on: ‘Farm Household Models’, ‘The Equilibrium Size Distribution of firms’

*Required Reading:*

Restuccia, D., and R. Santaeulalia-Llopis. 2017. “Land Misallocation and
Productivity.” National Bureau of Economic Research. [[link](http://www.nber.org/papers/w23128)]

Deininger, Klaus, Sara Savastano, and Fang Xia. 2017. “Smallholders’ Land Access
in Sub-Saharan Africa: A New Landscape?” *Food Policy*, Agriculture in Africa –
Telling Myths from Facts, 67 (Supplement C):78–92.[[link](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2016.09.012)]

Gollin, Douglas, and Chris Udry. 2017. “Heterogeneity, Measurement Error, and
Misallocation: Evidence from African Agriculture.” (*read only to section 4*)
[[link](https://egcenter.economics.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/Conference%202017%20Agri-Devo%20speakers/Gollin_Udry_Heterogeneity,%20Measurement%20Error,%20and%20Misallocation.pdf)]

**DAY 3: Contracting for Property Rights**

*Topics*: Most of the ‘transactions costs’ we’ve examined on land and labor
markets thus far have been modelled in reduced form: for example, by assuming
the non-tradability of farm management ability or land or by introducing a wedge
between hiring and selling factor prices. Modern contracting model transactions
costs as the emerging in environments where asymmetric information and costly
enforcement lead to constraints on the tradability of property claims and/or
leading to the distortion or breakdown of many markets (Stiglitz, Holmstrom,
Tirole, Hart). Contractual arrangements adapted to the information and
enforcement environment may emerge to attempt to ameliorate problems of moral hazard and imperfect commitment. However, agent’s ability to capture gains to trade and coordinaton via contracting may be strongly shaped by the initial allocation of ownership of land and other assets. This may give rise to
empirical phenomena such as an inverse relationship between farm-size and
productivity, and in general suggests that redistributing land via political
channels might raise total output. We study simple game-theoretic and
contracting situations to model a variety of situations including: land tenancy
contracts (e.g. choice between fixed rent, wage and share-crop), non-unitary
models of the household, the analysis of expropriation risk and taxation and
credit rationing. We also touch on a few simple models of common pool resource
management and models of land conflict and appropriation – all situations where
the inability to establish and enforce property rights and commitments leads to
contractual innovations to try to appropriate resources and/or ameliorate
inefficiencies.

Binswanger, H.P., K. Deininger, and G. Feder. 1995. “Power, Distortions, Revolt
and Reform in Agricultural Land Relations,” in *Handbook of Development
Economics, Vol 3*. 2659–2772. North Holland: Elsevier. (*read Part II*) [link]

Hotte, Louis. 2001. “Conflicts over Property Rights and Natural-Resource
Exploitation at the Frontier.” *Journal of Development Economics* 66 (1):1–21.

Goldstein, Markus, and Christopher Udry. 2008. “The Profits of Power: Land
Rights and Agricultural Investment in Ghana.” *Journal of Political Economy* 116
(6):981–1022.

Lecture slides, [jupyter notebooks](https://github.com/jhconning/land_uct_2018/tree/master/notebooks) on: ‘risk sharing’, ‘moral hazard and credit rationing’, ‘property rights on the frontier.’

**Day 4: The political economy of land rights**

*Topics:* Another perspective is that the direction of institutional change is
largely shaped by elite interests and the shifting balance of power,
Institutions are shaped by histories of conquest and appropriation, efforts by
local elites or emerging state powers to extract tribute or taxes from their
subjects or rents as well as by resistance to such efforts. In states with
relatively weak central states local elites often act as gatekeepers, arbiters
or intermediaries on local land and labor allocation issues. Socially
inefficient institutions may arise when elites find it more advantageous to
distort the economy to grab resources, extract rents and stay in political power
than provide more efficient services. Even if new property arrangements emerge
that might improve the utilization of resources in the economy there is no
guarantee that the winners from such reforms will ever compensate the losers. In
conditions of land abundance labor is the more valuable scarce factor of
production. In some land abundant regions an open frontier allowed households to enjoy freedoms and establish family farms to escape elite controls which
established *de facto* land property rights (that depending on political context
may or may not have become secure) but in other regions more organized and
powerful elites imposed mechanisms of labor coercion and/or restrictions on
smallholder’s access to land. We model some of these ideas explicitly and review
a number of natural experiment studies that explore how well they might account
for many historical forms of production organization, custom and law.

*Reading:*

Soto, Hernando de. 2001. “Citadels of Dead Capital: What the Third World Must
Learn from U.S. History.” *Reason* May. [[link](http://reason.com/0105/fe.hs.citadels.shtml%20C:/Opapers/Land/US/deSoto%20article%20on%20US%20squatters%20in%20Reason01.pdf.)]

Fenske, J. 2013. “Does Land Abundance Explain African Institutions?” *The
Economic Journal* 123 (573):1363–1390.

Binswanger, H.P., and K. Deininger. 1993. “South African Land Policy: The Legacy
of History and Current Options.” *World Development* 21 (9):1451–1475.

Lecture slides, [jupyter notebooks](https://github.com/jhconning/land_uct_2018/tree/master/notebooks) on ‘Latifundia economics’

**Day 5: Land property rights reforms: successes, failures and impact evaluation challenges**

*Topics:* Property rights and institutions are fundamental determinants of long
run growth because they shape the incentives of individuals to invest, manage
joint resources, innovate and trade. Yet land insecurity has persisted for long
periods of time in many parts of the world, even where seemingly far-reaching
reforms were already attempted. The reason of course is that changing land
institutions and the distribution of rights is deeply political. Land property
rights and tenure systems, as well as the governance structures that sustain
them are endogenous. The decision to establish, challenge, or respect property
rights (for example via investments in buildings, improvements or protection or
by seeking approval and legitimacy from others, including local or legal
authorities is a personal one but one that is strongly conditioned by the
incentives created by existing institutions and the shifting distribution of
power. On this last day we study several reform attempts around the world, some
which have succeeded and helped pave the road for structural transformation and
broadly inclusive growth, and others that were delayed, stalled, or otherwise
failed to achieve their potential for reasons including: program capture by
politicians and insiders, failure to protect the rights of women, smallholders
and other ‘weak’ stakeholders, land grabbing and other appropriation activities
by connected insiders, or failures of the state to build supporting
institutions.

*Reading:*

Onoma, Ato Kwamena. 2009. “Explaining Institutional Choice and Change,” chapter 2 in *The Politics of Property Rights Institutions in Africa*. Cambridge
University Press.

Conning, Jonathan, and Partha Deb. 2007. *Impact Evaluation for Land Property
Rights Reforms*. World Bank, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management, Thematic Group on Poverty Analysis, Monitoring and Impact Evaluation. (*read only to page 15*) [[link](http://econ.hunter.cuny.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/6/RePEc/papers/HunterEconWP419.pdf)]

Sitko, Nicholas J., Jordan Chamberlin, and Munguzwe Hichaambwa. 2014. “Does
Smallholder Land Titling Facilitate Agricultural Growth?: An Analysis of the
Determinants and Effects of Smallholder Land Titling in Zambia.” *World
Development* 64:791–802.

Binswanger, H.P., K. Deininger, and G. Feder. 1995. “Power, Distortions, Revolt
and Reform in Agricultural Land Relations,” in *Handbook of Development
Economics, Vol 3*. 2659–2772. North Holland: Elsevier. (*read Part III*) [link]

Lecture slides.
